---
layout: page
title: Youth Football Helmet
driver: Introduction to Engineering
start: 2013-08-01
end: 2013-12-01
categories: Hardware
picture: /images/projects/helmet.jpg
---

The overall focus of Introduction to Engineering (ENGR 1620) is to expose students to the various engineering concentrations and to give them a chance to work in engineering teams on small projects. As a class of nearly 40 students, we came together as a team and researched the hazards of youth football players and the head injuries that they can suffer. We then researched ways to solve this problem and engineered a new helmet that decreased the chance of a concussion with a typical hit. The helmet was designed, built, and tested to ensure its functionality. This project reinforced teamwork as well as focused on the field of biomedical engineering.

Mission Statement: The focus of this project was to address the problems with current football helmets in preventing concussions among youth players. The most important component of this being the protection of the players’ heads and necks. These are being addressed in three separate areas: the outer shell of the helmet, the inner padding of the helmet, and the neck of the player. The goal is to reduce the likelihood of concussion by reducing the amount of force exerted on the head during a hit and by decreasing the movement of the head during a hit to prevent trauma between the brain and the skull. The force generated by such a hit has a detrimental impact on not only the brain, but the neck as well. Thus, another goal is to reduce the whiplash of the neck that frequently accompanies tackling in youth football. In order to have an effect on the safety of the players, safer, more youth-conscious helmets need to be created.
